The Joe Rogan experience. Now you get through this, right?
You write your book and you get in this,
this rowboat journey had the rowboat journey been done before.
So the rowboat before, um, there's a storied history of ocean rowing.
So ocean rowing, um, you know, uh, sure. The Polynesians. Yeah. I mean,
it goes way back, but even at kind of as a sport, um, and, uh, you know,
maybe the polar community wants to do this more formally,
but there's something called the ocean rowing society that has, you know,
the records of different rows going back over time. Um,
there's this race across the Atlantic, um, that happens called the taser ocean,
uh, taser whiskey, ocean race, um, across the Atlantic from, um, from the,
or is it go from, from the Canary islands to the Caribbean, every, uh,
winter that happens. So ocean rowing, I mean, it's a subculture,
it's a small subculture. Don't get me wrong, but it happens. Like it's a thing,
you know, there's, there's boats, there's races, there's competitions,
but has anybody gone to no one that path? Yeah.
So Drake passage had never been rode fully and completely before there was
a guy. Um, who's legend as well. Um,
I wish I wish he was still alive. Cause I love to sit down more than anything.
This guy's name's N Gillette, um, a true, true like explor. I mean,
he actually got, um, killed, uh, in the late nineties,
I believe when he was climbing in the Himalayas or in Pakistan. Um, he got shot,
um, by someone who came through the camp. I don't know the whole story.
It was super sad story, but he's done all of these projects, you know,
before or social media and stuff like this.
This guy was out there doing these badass things and he made this boat, uh,
called the sea tomato and he took it down to Chile, um, to try to kind of do a,
what was like kind of a hybrid row and sail.
And so he has a sailing mask on there. He's got,
or he's got four guys with them. They try it the first season.
They actually can't even launch their boat off of K KPOs.
They wait a whole other year.
And then the second year they launched a sea tomato, um, under sale. Why,
why do they have to wait a year? Because the weather, I mean,
Drake passage is we'll get to that, but it is gnarly, bro. Like, it is like,
I mean, people, you know, as you say, going around the horn,
people say that in sailing,
like Cape horn is known to just be like just treacherous, brutal water as the,
to these oceans kind of coal lie. And these huge standing waves come up.
So a whole season, they sat down there with the robot and didn't even launch it.
Then the next year came back, him and four guys, how.
Smalls the window where you can make it across.
So, uh, basically the best time of year to do it would be December, January,
because that's the Southern hemisphere summer. Um,
and so the temperature's a little bit warmer. You've got longer days.
We purposefully, he did it over the, um, summer or the summer Solt.
So December 21st, you know,
that'd be June 21st for us in the Northern hemisphere. Um,
the longest day of the year, we still had night, um, you know, few days,
a few hours of darkness every single night,
but we at least had the longer days because once it gets dark and there's waves
coming at you from every single direction, I mean, it is scary, man.
This is it, this a Drake passage,
obviously I've seen from a bigger boat than mine, but you know, oh that.
<Laugh> can I see what it was like in your boat? Do you have a.
Video? You must video boat. If you pull up my that's insane.
If you pull up my Instagram, uh, how many people die out there? I mean, it,
I don't know the numbers, but um,
well a plane crash happened the day we were leaving and 38 people died in a
plane crash in Drake passage, as we were about to depart on our it's a whole,
that's a whole other whole other crazy story. But, um, but you know,
there's definitely, there's shipwrecks out there.
There's boats that have gone down. There was a, a cruise ship.
I think that went down in the two thousands, um, in Drake passage,
in Drake passage. Yeah. And a cruise ship.
I hope I don't get that story completely wrong,
but I'm pretty sure a big boat went down I in the last 10 years or so,
what the is a cruise ship doing there? They go to Antarctica,
see that they do the, an, they go to the Penn Antarctica.
So actually there's quite a few, uh, cruise ships. Um, yeah, so here here's me.
Uh, oh, so it's actually fairly calm times. So I mean, some of the times,
if yeah, you got some swells, but I mean, you'll see this next part.
So this is me in the tiny little cabin. Um, I mean,
waves coming over the crashing, the, so where's the cabin and the,
the where closest to us. Yeah. Closest to us is the little cabin I was in.
That was just one of us in there. And this is, uh,
so this is us putting out something called the sea anchor. Um,
that's when the waves got so big or the wind and swell was against us so much
that we couldn't row anymore.
And it's like throwing a parachute that basically like,
kind of tries to hold you in place. Um, I mean, you look at this coming up,
what is it? So it's like a huge parachute,
basically it's in the water and you put it in the water and it fills with water
and it holds the boat into place. I mean, not very well, even in this,
if we volume up, it's me basically, uh,
talking about how we're getting pushed back in the wrong direction,
but we can't even, we don't have the strength to row against it anymore. Um,
just getting hammered. Um, but the, how far did it push you back?
I think that time it pushed us back like, uh, 15 or 20 miles. Um,
so you lose 15 or 20 miles of progress. Yeah. And that one,
that was the longest ya, I believe on it for 26 hours.
And so what happens is like you saw on the boat,
there's three people rowing three people in the cabins, any given time.
And the cabins are tiny when you're even with the, you know,
one person on one side, like I was two on the other side,
like you're like smashing there, like a sardine,
but then when you put the sea anchor out, no one's rowing anymore. And that,
you know, open decking, it's like really dangerous to just be sitting out there.
So we all try to get in the cabins, but like this Iceland dude,
who's the captain fi Paul, I mean, he's like amazing row, you know, six foot,
two broad shoulders, whatever. All of a sudden,
the two of us are jammed inside of like the smallest Silicon compartments,
like two feet around three feet wide by three feet tall.
We're like spooning each other. We're wet. Whoa, we're cold.
We're in there for 26 hours that time. Like how did you guys poop?
So if you look that sweet, yeah. That this one shows kind of the wave,
the big swell, I'm the, I'm the one in the back there. And, uh,
I'm sitting right next to really fancy toilet,
a little something called a five gallon bucket. <laugh> oh, that,
who did you pooped in a bucket? Pooped in a bucket shot too fancy. Yeah. And,
uh, then, then the fish can snack on that, but you know, obviously get,
not only were we spooning under sea anchor smashing these little things then,
and oftentimes those other,
the other guys in the other compartment were either three. Um,
three of them were inside the compartment at a time and one would be sitting
out, um, and taking shifts or they sometimes smash four in there. Um,
but I mean, they're like literally on top of each other, so we got close,
but then also, obviously there's no space on the deck. So it's like, Hey man,
just turn your head away. I'm gonna be, you know, pooping a,
basically a foot away from you while you row into this bucket. Like.
Don't mind me,
those mountain houses will create some horrible smells on your body.
<laugh> I've had those mountain houses while hunting.
They're rough <laugh> especially for me. Cause I don't need a lot of like,
there's just, it's all like, you know, it tastes.
Good though. They do tastes good. Yeah. Especially.
When you're in the middle of the ocean. I bet they're delicious.
I loved them. Yeah. Yeah. They're really good. That, that,
and the bars I was happy with with the eat was good, but uh.
When you're halfway out, there was any point in time where you're like,
what the is wrong with me? Why am I doing this? Yes.
100 Per set. So one of the things like, you know, people have asked me was,
you know, solar, Antarctica crossing harder in the row, whatever. And it's like,
they're very different.
But one of the things that was so brutal about this Antarctica in the crossing
was, was a lot colder than the Drake passage row.
It was about average temperature.
When we were out there was probably like in low thirties, you know,
dipped below a few times, but the ocean temperature, like I said, 32, you know,
33, you know,
just above freezing there's icebergs in the water and we're getting close to it
and you're just getting splashed the entire time. So from like minute, one hour,
one leaving Cape horn, we are soaking.
Wet. And what kind of equipment are you wearing?
Like what kind of gear are you wearing that keeps you from getting really.
Cold? So we, we started out, um, in just this quart, X is a thick,
like sailing Goretex basically.
And that worked pretty well for the first few days,
but one of the other cool innovations, um,
that Fiat thought of having done so much ocean rowing is he was like, dude,
the only way this is gonna work is if we have some sort of dry suit is just too
cold, but you start looking at dry suits and you're like, you could never row,
you can't be functional, like wearing like this like crazy, a dry suit. Right.
And so he basically says he, he spends the year.
One of the things that he did is he found this like Polish manufacturer and we
all got our bodies measuring, you know, twentys five,
six different measurements and all this,
and basically created these custom dry suits that were a lot thinner than a
typical dry suit, but kept us dry,
but also allowed us to have the mobility on the OS.
And it was really built for the sitting position and the leg, you know,
the leg press and the arm motion and all that of rowing. Um,
so it was awesome innovation. And we got just, I mean,
thank God we have those cuz we were getting soaked. I mean, we were getting so,
so, so soaked out there and in the 90 minutes you would think like, oh,
in the 90 minutes, quote, unquote rest phase you would get in there, you know,
maybe change clothes or something like that. No, absolutely not like the,
we had these suits on we're soaking wet, we'd get in the cabin.
We were all sharing like one sleeping bag.
Like I had just one sleeping bag that fi and I were alternating.
It's soaking wet after the first day. Yeah. There's just like,
it's basically like if I showed you what it looked like last day, you'd be like,
I wouldn't sit in there for one minute, let alone like try to sleep.
And there's like, no pillars like wa like the brown O on the bottom,
like inter just like, you know,
it's the smells from us living in and out of there for this. I mean,
it was grimy and wet and cold, but these suits, um, suited us pretty well.
The one thing that was great, you know, obviously we were clipped in for safety.
So we were clipped into basically these ropes that you saw on the edge of there.
So if we were gonna get knocked off, um, the boat, hopefully we would, you know,
be able to clipped in or the boat itself actually fully self. Right.
So if it rolls over it, hypothetically rolls back over the top.
We had some close calls, but we never fully rolled it. Thank God. Um,
but we did test that, but one of the things about the suits is the suits, um,
basically have like neoprene, boot,
it's all like one kind of one piece like you would have in a dry suit,
which was awesome for keeping us, you know, safe and dry.
But I didn't take the suit off for the last six or seven days at all.
And so when I finally took the suit off my feet,
like you think about your fingers getting like, pruny maybe like, you know,
in a swimming pool for a couple hours or hot tub or something like that.
Like imagine, imagine seven days of wet and cold and sweat.
And like all the things like when I took the suit off,
like I almost threw up on the ground cause it was just like gnarly festering
skin. And like, like skin was ripping off of my feet. Like it was nasty.
How long took you to recover from that? Um, uh, I don't know exactly.
It's hard to put the point on like, oh, I'm recovered,
but definitely took a few weeks to just kind of get everything back, you know,
that's the stability back in the body mind and all of that. So, uh, yeah. Yeah,
it was, uh, it was interesting for sure.